Once you've developed your algorithm,
you're going to want to know how it performs on real-world data,
and even more importantly to be able to communicate
those performance metrics to those who are going to be using it in practice.
Let's find out how to do just that.
Recall from the prior lesson the following expression of Bayes Theorem and how
the likelihood ratio captured whether a test result
usefully changes the probability that a condition or disease is present.
Will now learn how to calculate that ratio for
a diagnostic test by understanding the performance metrics that underpin it,
that is sensitivity and specificity.
Let's start with sensitivity.
Sensitivity is a metric that quantifies the probability of a test being
positive given that a patient has the underlying disease or condition.
Here it is expressed mathematically.
On the other hand, specificity is a metric that quantifies the probability of
a test being negative given that a patient does
not have the underlying disease or condition.
Again, here it is expressed mathematically.
Now that we understand what sensitivity and specificity are,
let's see how they'd be calculated from our data.
To do so, we'll use a familiar friend, the confusion matrix.
If we read down the columns here,
we can see that this represents all of the patients with the disease.
These are the patients without disease and then across these rows are the test results.
For example, in this case,
the patient has the disease and the test result is positive,
resulting in a true positive.
In this situation, the disease is positive but the test is negative,
resulting in a false negative.
Let's say we had a case where we had 200 patients,
100 with the disease,
and 100 without, which you can get to by adding these columns down.
In this circumstance, we're able to calculate sensitivity by taking the number of
true positives and then dividing it by
the number of all the patients with the disease, as seen here.
To obtain specificity, we'll take the number of
true negatives and then divide it by all of the patients without the disease,
which is some down this column.
In doing so, we see that the sensitivity of
this exam is 80 percent and the specificity is 70 percent.
Notice that we're using the phrase patients who
truly have the disease and those who don't.
In these types of studies,
this is determined by using
a gold standard reference test and this isn't always an imaging study.
So consider, how did we come to this conclusion?
Was it a blood test?
Was it a biopsy?
It's always worth asking yourself where is ground truth coming from?
Okay, we now have sensitivity and specificity under our belt.
Let's talk about the likelihood ratio.
As you recall, the likelihood ratio is
a diagnostic performance metric used to determine whether
a test result usefully changes the probability that a condition or diseases is present.
A value of one indicates no effect on the posterior odds of disease and as
the value increases so does
the posterior odds or post-test probability that a disease is present.
If a test result is positive,
you can calculate the positive likelihood ratio with the following formulation,
which turns out to be the sensitivity divided by one minus specificity.
If the test result is negative,
we use the negative likelihood ratio,
which is one minus sensitivity over specificity,
and that is how sensitivity and specificity
are related to the all-important likelihood ratio.
So now we know how to calculate the likelihood ratio of a test is positive or negative,
but how do these values apply to real-world situations?
This useful table maps the value of
the likelihood ratio to the approximate change in probability of a condition,
as well as the subjective magnitude of the increase,
this assumes the test was positive.
Here's the corresponding table for a test with a negative result. So good job.
Now you understand sensitivity,
specificity, and how to use those to calculate the likelihood ratio.
This will be critical when you're evaluating
your algorithm's performance and trying to communicate
those results to the people who will eventually be using it.